(electronic music)
(keyboard clicking)
All right, so as I mentioned
in the very brief introduction,
a hash table is an abstract data type.
So it doesn't dictate how you store the data.
You can back a hash table with whatever you want.
A hash table provides access to data, using keys.
So when it comes to hash tables,
they consist of key/value pairs.
When you add an item, you provide the key and the value
and when you want to retrieve the item,
you provide the key.
And then from there, the hash table can retrieve the value,
and it can do it really, really quickly.
So hash tables are optimised for retrieval,
when you know the key, obviously.
If you don't know the key,
then retrieval is not gonna be very fast.
You can do it, but it's gonna be slow.
So when we're talking about arrays,
we could see the array index is the key
and the value is the element in the array.
But, for hash tables, the key doesn't have to be an integer.
You can use whatever you want.
You can use whatever type of object you want.
Strings are a common data type that's used for keys.
In fact, if you've worked with languages like PHP,
that have associative arrays,
well associative arrays are one type of hash table.
And so, in that case, you're using a string as the key
into values in the array.
Now, the key/value pairs,
the data types don't have to match.
So, as you'll see, we'll use a string as a key
to retrieve employee objects.
We're gonna use the last name of the employee as the key.
And so hash tables consist of key/value pairs,
they're optimised for retrieval,
and they provide direct access
to values in the table, using keys.
Now, another word for hash table,
they're also known as dictionaries, maps.
If you've ever used one of the map classes in Java,
you're working with a hash table, lookup tables,
and as I said, associative arrays.
Okay, so I mentioned that the keys can be any data type.
So you could have a string as a key,
you can have whatever you want as a key.
But under the covers,
those keys are being converted to integers.
One common way of backing a hash table,
is to use an array.
And of course, for an array,
you've got to have integer indices.
And so, to convert the keys to integers,
you hash the key.
And this is a process known as hashing.
And so hashing maps keys of any data type to an integer.
And so essentially, a hash function, maps keys to int.
Now in Java, the hash function is hash code,
and the object class has a hash code method.
And so every object in the JDK, has this hash code method.
Of course, you can override it,
and it is often overridden.
Now it's possible that the hashing method
may produce the same integer for more than one value.
And when that happens, it's known as a collision.
So, in our case, let's say, as I mentioned,
we're going to use the last name of our employee
as the key.
Well if we have more than one employee
with the last name Jones,
then when we go to add Jane Jones to the hash table,
Jones will be hashed to an integer.
And if we went to add Mike Jones to the hash table,
Jones will be hashed to an integer,
and they're gonna get the same results.
So their hashed key/values are going to be the same integer.
And when the happens, it's known as a collision.
And there are strategies for dealing with collisions,
and we'll look at those later on.
So some examples of keys and values
would be product numbers and products.
So, you'd have the product number as the key
and the product as the value.
Now you might be saying,
well if the product number is an integer,
why would we have to hash it?
Well, you may only have 10 product numbers
that correspond to barcode values, for example.
And so, you know, you may only have 10 distinct products
for your business, but the product IDs
are things like 58298754.
Obviously you're not gonna use that as an array index,
so you're gonna have to somehow hash those values
to array indices zero to nine.
Employee IDs and employee objects,
that's another possible key/value pair that we could use,
rather than using the last name as the key.
User names and profiles.
When you create an account at a website,
and you provide a user name, that, under the covers,
may be getting hashed to an integer,
and that integer's what used to look up your profile.
And of course, there's many, many more examples.
Now one important value for hash tables, is the load factor.
The load factor tells us how full a hash table is.
So let's say we're backing the hash table with an array.
The load factor would tell us how full the array is.
And we can get that
by dividing the number of items by the capacity.
Which is essentially, the size over the capacity.
So if we had an array of 10 backing our hash table,
and we had five employees currently in the hash table,
the load factor would be 0.5.
So that tells us that our array is half full.
So the load factor is used to decide
when to resize the array, backing the hash table.
I'm using an array as an example.
Now, it's kind of a balancing act.
We don't want the load factor to be too low,
because that means there's lots of empty space, right?
I mean, if your load factor is point one,
it means that only 10% of your array is occupied.
But we don't want it to be too high
because that will increase the likelihood of collisions.
If most of the array is full, and you keep adding items,
you are going to get collisions, eventually,
because you're basically hashing the keys
to a range of values,
essentially, the valid indices in the array.
And so, if your array is already pretty full
and you're gonna be adding lots more items,
you're gonna start to get collisions.
So to add to a hash table backed by an array,
we would provide the key/value pair,
and then we would use a hash function,
or in Java's case, we'd say a hash method,
to hash the key to an int value.
So let's say we wanna add Jane Jones
and we provide the key Jones,
we would have a hash function
that hashes Jones to an int value,
and then we would store Jane Jones at the hash key/value.
And so, if Jones hashed to the integer four,
we would store Jane Jones at index four
in the array that's backing the hash table.
Now when we want it to retrieve the employee
with the key Jones, we would provide the key.
And obviously, it's got to be the same key you used
when you added the object, or it's not gonna work.
And then we're going to hash the key again.
And obviously, you have to use the same hash function
that you're using to add values,
otherwise, it's not gonna work.
And so we'll provide the key Jones.
We'll use the same hash function
to hash the key to an int value, and we would get four.
And then we'd go and get the item
that's stored at position four in the array.
Now if by any chance we'd had collisions, of course,
we'd have to search through all the items.
In that case, our array would probably contain a linked list
or it would contain, each item in the array,
would be another array.
And so, we'd have to search through 'em.
As I said, we're gonna see later,
how to handle collisions.
So we'll see some of the ways that,
some of the strategies for dealing with collisions
and how we can store items
that have the same hash key/value.
So as I just went through, if we wanted to add Jane Jones
with the key of Jones,
we use a hash function to map Jones to an int.
And we'll assume we get the value four
and that we'd store Jane Jones at array four.
And then to get the employee with the key Jones,
we'd provide the key, we'd use the same hash function
to map Jones to an int, and we should get four,
'cause we're using the same hash function.
And so we just go to array index four,
and that would get us Jane Jones back.
And that's how hash tables work.
So let's move on, and as usual,
we're going to implement a simple hash table.
I'll see you in the next video.